---
title: Billy's Guide to using "zu" with verbs
date: 2022-10-13
layout: post
categories: grammar
---

### zu + infinitives

German verbs in the "infinitive" -- `machen`, `arbeiten`, `haben`, `sein` -- are translated as "to make," "to work," "to have," and "to be." So then why do you sometimes use `zu` along with them? Isn't that `to to work`?

There are pages of arcane rules about infinitive verbs in my big grammar book. I can't possibly capture every nuance of the German infinitive verb in one post! Let's just aim for the basics; the rest you will just have to absorb through immersion. 😈

## The most common helper verbs + infinitive: no "zu" needed

Just like English, German has a set of helper verbs ("modal verbs") that pair with another verb.

<span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">können - müssen - sollen - wollen - dürfen - mögen/möchten</span>

If one of these modal helper verbs is the conjugated verb, then the infinitive verb at the end **does not** need `zu`:

- Ich will einkaufen, du sollst schlafen.
- Du darfst hier nicht parken!
- Ich möchte einen Kaffee bestellen
- Sie musste mit ihrer Chefin sprechen
- Jeder kann es versuchen

Verbs of **perception** and **motion** can also fit here; they usually don't take `zu`. These will just start to sound right with enough immersion:

- Sie hörte das Kind weinen
- Ich sah ihn ins Zimmer kommen
- Kommst du denn heute schwimmen?

## Use "zu + infinitive" for most other regular verbs

Normal verbs that pair with an infinitive use the `zu`:

- Ich <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">versuche</span>, Deutsch <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu lernen</span>
- Er <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">hat</span> Angst davor, das Haus <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu verlassen</span>
- Es <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">lohnt</span> sich, mit dem Zug <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu fahren</span>
- Sie <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">empfiehlt</span>, eine Monatskarte <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu kaufen</span>
- Ich <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">hoffe</span>, dich wiedersehen <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu können</span>

Nothing can come between `zu` and the verb.

**Separable prefix verbs** take this even a step further: the `zu` slides in between the prefix and the root, because `zu` wants to be there right up against that verb root. Nothing can get in between them — not even the separable prefix!

- Ich hoffe, dich wieder<span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu</span>sehen
- Papa bietet immer an, ein Geschenk mit<span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu</span>bringen
- Es fällt mir schwer, aus<span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu</span>schlafen

## In order to.... `um .... zu`

Finally if the meaning is "in order to ...", even if in English we leave those words out, then you _always_ use `um ... zu`

- Wir kochen zu Hause, <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">um</span> Geld <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu</span> sparen
- <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">Um</span> mein Deutsch <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu verbessern</span>, schaue ich viel Anime.

That `um` is super important! Just remember: <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">Whenever it's in order to,</span> `um ... zu`!

- You'll also hear `ohne ... zu` and `statt ... zu` which are "without doing" and "instead of doing":
- Michael ging weg, <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">ohne</span> ein Wort <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu sagen</span>.
- Andrea ist hier geblieben, <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">statt</span> nach London <span style="color: mediumslateblue; font-weight: bold">zu fliegen</span>.

## Recap

- The six modal helper verbs
  <br/>➡️ No `zu` needed <br/><br/>
- Most regular verbs
  <br/> ➡️ use `zu` + the infinitive<br/><br/>
- In order to?
  <br/>➡️ `um ... zu`!<br/><br/>

`Zu` is extremely versatile and there are lots of other ways to use it beyond just these verb expressions. You'll hear it in passive voice with `sein`; it's also a preposition of course; and `zu` can even mean "closed". We'll save all those things for another day.

Have fun,

..b
